---
title: "Phaser Fundamentals"
date: 2020-08-20T11:45:38-07:00
draft: false
weight: 3
---

# Part 1: The Config Variable

Let's go over some of the fundamentals of Phaser, a game framework that uses HTML and JavaScript to create games for the web! This is what you'll be learning to use in this workshop.

Go to `game.js`. Every Phaser game will start out off with a variable that stores the configurations for the game (often named config like we have here). In this variable, you'll notice that we have defined a variety of characteristics of our game like the width, the height, and background color. We have also defined the scenes that we will be using (more info on scenes a bit later). You can also create a game without scenes and simply put all of the code into the `game.js` file.

You'll also notice that we define the physics of the game in Config as well. In game design, physics is one of the most essential aspects that define the "feel" of a game. For example, the bouncy physics in Mario distinctively makes it "feel like Mario." For our game, you can see that we use "arcade" physics, a type of physics in Phaser that is very simple to use. Also notice that in our Physics, we define Gravity to be 0, because our game is a Space Shooter so we don't need any gravity pulling our characters down.

At the end of `game.js`, you can see that we pass the config variable to a game variable, something that is also almost always needed in a Phaser game.

# Part 2: Scenes

Now, let's finally talk about scenes a little bit. A scene is essentially a game state that the user is operating within. It's best understood within an example:

///show example of a game and a minimap

In this game, you can see that there is a section where the player is able to freely roam around the world. They also have an option to open up a mini-map to look at the world from a birds eye view. In this case, these are two scenes. There is one scene that the player can roam around and play the main game, but once the player selects the mini map, the scenes switch and suddenly the player is now interacting with a scene for the map.

We could technically use a single scene for both of these if we wanted to (how you divide a game into scenes will be up to the game designer), but in this case, creating separate scenes will make the coding much easier because the game state of roaming the world and interacting with a map are very different and function completely differently.

Here is another example of a very common way to use scenes: a title screen.

////example of title screen

The first scene displays simply a title screen that often contains things like settings, loading a save file, and more. Once the player clicks play, they are switched to a different scene, where they'll play the game within.

This is exactly what we're going to be doing. Scene 1 will contain a title screen, and Scene 2 will contain our actual gameplay. Thus, Scene 2 will have the majority of the code, and it'll be where you will do most if your work.

# Part 3: Infinite Canvas

When you start up the game on the repl, you can see a blank canvas on your screen where you will eventually place things onto. However, you are only seeing a part of the total canvas - actually, the canvas is infinite in all directions. The canvas behaves the same way in all sections - this means that objects can move and be placed into parts of the canvas that the user cannot see. This will become important because for our game, we don't want things really going out of the screen very much, so we need to bind our objects within the screen or delete them if they exit.

